Case-based Diagnosis of Multiple Faults

Ralph Deters
Universität der Bundeswehr Munchen
Institut für Technische Informatik
85577 Neubiberg, F.R.Germany
E-mail: deters@infomiatik.unibw-muenchen.de


Abstract:
In order to maintain complex technical systems e.g. a telecommunication network, a rapid and
precise recognition of faults and critical situations is required. But the large number of different
components, the high degree of interdependencies among the components and the permanent
changes in these systems make the diagnosis of faults and critical situations difficult.
Case-based Reasoning (CBR) seems particularly well suited for such a diagnosis. The ability to
reuse old experiences by adapting them to current needs offers a possibility to handle the large
number of diagnoses as well as the changes in the systems. However, the large number of
components results in the problem of diagnosing multiple independent faults which leads to
serious difficulties in retrieval and adaptation.
This paper focuses on the specific problems of diagnosing multiple independent faults. An
incremental retrieval and adaptation approach based on an hypothesis and test strategy is
introduced which is able to cope with data of multiple overlapping problems. At the end of this
paper is given a report about the experiences in using the described algorithm for handling
multiple faults in telecommunication networks.

References
[Kol93] J. Kolodner: Case-Based Reasoning, Morgan Kaufmann, 1993
[Rie89] C. K. Riesbeck: Inside Case-based Reasoning, Erlbaum, 1989
[Cun94] P. Cunningham: A Comparison of Model-Based and Incremental Case-Based 
Approaches to Electronic Fault Diagnosis, AAAI’94 Workshop on CBR. 1994
[Det94] R. Deters: CBR for Maintenance of Telecommunication Networks,
EWCBR-94, 1994
[Det95] R. Deters: Multidimensional Structuring of a Case-Memory, CBR-Workshop
at XPS-95, 1995
[Rie93] M. Riese: Model-Based Diagnosis of Communication Protocols, Doctoral
Thesis No. 1173, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology Lausanne, 1993
[Kle93] J. de Kleer: Characterising Diagnoses, AAAI-90, MIT-Press 1990
[Ngu89] T. A. Nguyen: Diagnosing Multiple Faults in Digital Systems, The Fifth
Conference on Artificial Intelligence Applications
[Rei87] R. Reiter: A theory of diagnosis from first principles”, Artificial Intelligence
32, 1987
[Zit93] R. Zito-Wolf: A Framework and a Analysis of Current Proposals for the
Case-Based Organisation and Representation of Procedural Knowledge, Eleventh
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence
