Defining Similarity Measures:
Top-Down vs. Bottom-Up

Armin Stahl

University of Kaiserslautern, Computer Science Department
Artificial Intelligence - Knowledge-Based Systems Group
67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany
stahl@informatik.uni-ki.de



Abstract. Defining similarity measures is a crucial task when developing 
CBR applications. Particularly, when employing utility-based similarity 
measures rather than pure distance-based measures one is confronted 
with a difficult knowledge engineering task. In this paper we
point out some problems of the state-of-the-art procedure to defining
similarity measures. To overcome these problems we propose an alternative 
strategy to acquire the necessary domain knowledge based on a Machine 
Learning approach. To show the feasibility of this strategy several
application scenarios are discussed and some results of an experimental
evaluation for one of these scenarios are presented.
References

1.	R. Bergmann, M. Michael Richter, S. Schmitt, A. Stahl, and I. Volirath. Utility-oriented 
matching: A new research direction for Case-Based Reasoning. In Professionelles 
Wissensmanagement: Erfahrungen und Visionen. Proceedings of the 1st
Conference on Professional Knowledge Management. Shaker, 2001.
2.	A. Bonzano, P. Cunningham, and B. Smyth. Using introspective learning to improve 
retrieval in CBR: A case study in air traffic control. In Proceedings of the
2nd International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning. Springer, 1997.
3.	K. Branting. Acquiring customer preferences from return-set selections. In Proceedings 
of the 4th International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning. Springer,
2001.
4.	Pedro Domingos. The role of occam’s razor in knowledge discovery. Data Mining
and Knowledge Discovery, 3(4):409—425, 1999.
5.	A. Goker. Capturing information need by learning user context. In Working Notes
of the Workshop on Learning about Users, 16th International Joint Conference in
Artificial Intelligence, 1999.
6.	J. Jarmulak, S. Craw, and R. Rowe. Genetic algorithms to optimise CBR retrieval.
In Proceedings of the 5th European Workshop on Case-Based Reasoning. Springer,
2000.
7.	D. Leake, A. Kinley, and D. Wilson. Linking adaptation and similarity learning.
In Proceedings of the 18th Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science Society.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 1996.
8.	D. Leake and D. Wilson. Remembering why to remember: Performance-guided
case-base maintenance. In Proceedings of the 5th European Workshop on Case-Based 
Reasoning: Advances in Case-Based Reasoning. Springer, 2000.
9.	T. Reinartz, I. Iglezakis, and T. Roth-Berhofer. On quality measures for case
base maintenance. In Proceedings of the 5th European Workshop on Case-Based
Reasoning: Advances in Case-Based Reasoning. Springer, 2000.
10.	B. Smyth and M. T. Keane. Retrieving adaptable cases: The role of adaptation
knowledge in case retrieval. In Proceedings of the 1st European Workshop on Case-Based 
Reasoning. Springer, 1993.
11.	B. Smyth and E. McKenna. Modelling the competence of case-bases. In Proceedings
of the 4th European Workshop on Case-Based Reasoning. Springer, 1998.
12.	A. Stahl. Learning feature weights from case order feedback. In Proceedings of the
4th International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning. Springer, 2001.
13.	Dietrich Wettschereck and David W. Aha. Weighting features. In Proceeding of
the 1st International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning. Springer Verlag, 1995.
14.	Z. Zhang and Q. Yang. Dynamic refiniement of feature weights using quantitative
introspective learning. In Proceedings of the 16th International Joint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence, 1999.
