PROFIL : a decision support tool for metallic
sections design using a CBR approach

Jean Luc WYBO, Fréderic GEFFRAYE, Aline RUSSELL
Ecole des Mines de Paris - CEMEF/IAM

B.P. 207 - 06904 Sophia Antipolis Cedex (France)


Abstract

This paper presents the PROFIL system, a Decision Support Tool for the Design of
metallic sections production. The PROFIL system uses a Case-Based Reasoning approach
for the selection of pertinent former designs.
Production of metallic sections is done by a succession of forming operations. The design
task is composed of two parts : selection and scheduling of operations and assessment of
forming tools geometry.
The PROFIL system also provides support to production technicians, to input process
parameters and control measurements as part of cases, and to adjust settings during pre-production trials.
Selection of cases is made by following two orthogonal points of view, on similarity and
quality of produced parts. Similarity is based on selection of relevant dimensions of the
section, while quality is based on selection of potential defects. Each dimension or defect
is associated to an evaluation function which uses a fuzzy logic approach. To improve
ergonomy, relevant cases are displayed in a two-dimension space : similitude/quality.
Implementation of the system has been done on a computer workstation, using a
commercial DBMS, in order to cope with industrial requirements.
The PROFIL system is operational in the industrial site and provides support to designers
and process technicians.
References

[Cauzenille 85] Cauzenille-Marmeche E., Mathieu J., Weil-Barais A. “Raisonnement
analogique et résolution de problèmes” l’année psychologique, (1985), 85, pp. 49-72
[Darpa 89] “Case-Based Reasoning” in Proceedings of the DARPA Workshop on
Case-Based Reasoning, Machine Learning Program Plan, DARPA ed., Pensacola
Beach Florida, 1989
[Geffraye 94] Geffraye F. “Aide à la conception d’outillage : apport de la simulation et
du raisonnement par cas. Application à l’étirage de profilés métalliques” Thése de
doctorat, Ecole des Mines de Paris, 1994
[Levine 89] Levine P., Pomerol J.C. “Systèmes Interactifs d’Aide à la Décision et
Systèmes experts” Traité des nouvelles technologies, Hermés ed., Paris 1989
[Maurice-Demourioux 93] Maurice-Demourioux M., Lâasri B., Levallet C., Pinson
S. “Le raisonnement à partir de cas : panorama et modélisation dynamique” in
Séminaire Raisonnement à partir de cas, LAFORIA, Institut Blaise Pascal, Paris
1993
[Rougegrez 94] Rougegrez S. “Prédiction de processus à partir de comportements
observés : le système REBECAS” Thése de doctorat, Université Paris VI, 1994
[Schank 82] Schank R. “Dynamic memory : a theory of reminding and learning in
computers and people” Cambridge University Press, 1982
[Slade 91] Slade S. “Case-Based Reasoning : A Research Paradigm”, AI Magazine,
1991, pp. 42-55
[Trousse 93] Trousse B., Visser W. “Use of Case-Based Reasoning techniques for
intelligent computer-aided design systems” in 1993 IEEE International Conference on
Systems, Man and Cybernetics, IEEE, pp. 513-518
[Visser 93] Visser W., Trousse B. “Reuse of designs : desesperately seeking an
interdisciplinary cognitive approach” in Proccedings of IJCAI’93 Workshop on Reuse
of designs, an Interdisciplinary approach, Chambéry, France, 1993
