Applying Recursive CBR for the Customization
of Structured Products in an Electronic Shop

Armin Stahl and Ralph Bergmann


Centre for Learning Systems and Applications (LSA), University of Kaiserslautern
PO-Box 3049, D-67653 Kaiserslautern, Germany
{stahl , bergmann}@informatik.uni-ki.de




Abstract. When applying CBR for Electronic Commerce. the adaptation 
capabilities of CBR can be used for product customization. Most
adaptation techniques suffer from the problem that they require a large
knowledge acquisition effort which leads to problems in the rapidly changing 
U-Commerce scenario. In this paper we present a new approach to
adaptation that is particularly suited to Electronic Commerce applications. 
It assumes that products can be structured hierarchically into
sub-components. Adaptation is achieved by incrementally replacing unsuitable 
sub-components through recursively applying CI3R to find best-matching 
alternative sub-components. The presented approach avoids
huge portions of the knowledge acquisition effort and is prototypically
implemented as an extension of the CBR-Works tool.
References

1.	R. Bergmann, S. Breen, M. Göker, M. Manago, and S. Wess. Developing Industrial
Case-Based Reasoning Applications: The INRECA Methodology. State-of-the-Art-Survey, 
LNAI 1612. Springer Verlag, 1999.
2.	R. Bergmann and A. Stahl. Similarity measures for object-oriented case representations. 
In B. Smyth and P. Gunningham, editors, Case-Based Reasoning Research
and Development, volume 1488 of LNAI, pages 25—36. Springer, 1998.
3.	R. Bergmann, W. Wilke, I. Volirath, and S. Wess. Integrating general knowledge
with object-oriented case representation and reasoning. In 4th German Workshop:
Case-Based Reasoning - System Development and Evaluation 1996, 1996.
4.	R. Burke. The wasabi personal shopper: A case-based recommender system. In
11th International Conference on Innovative Applications of Artificial Intelligence,
1999.
5.	R. Cunis, A. Günther, and H. Strecker, editors. Das PLAKON-Buch. Number 266
in Informatik-Fachberichte. Springer, Berlin, 1991.
6.	B. D. Netten and R. A. Vingerhoeds. Incremental adaptation for conceptual design 
in EADOCS. In European Conference on Artificial Intelligence (ECAI’98)
Workshop on Adaptation in Case-Based Reasoning, 1996.
7.	K. Pfitzner Fallbasiertes Konfigurieren technischer Systeme. Dissertation, Universität 
Hamburg, 1993.
8.	S. Schmitt and R. Bergmann. Product customization in an electronic commerce
environment using adaptation operators. In 7th German Workshop on Case-Based
Reasoning, 1999.
9.	I. Watson and S. Perera. Context guided retrieval. In David B. Leake and Enric
Plaza, editors, Case-Based Reasoning Research and Development, volume 1266 of
Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence, pages 359—370. Springer, July 1997. International 
Conference on Case-Based Reasoning ICCBR-97.
10.	W. Wilke. Knowledge Management for Intelligent Sales Support in Electronic
Commerce. DISKI 213. Infix Verlag, 1999.
11.	W. Wilke and R. Bergmann. Techniques and knowledge used for adaptation during 
case-based problem solving. In 11th International Conference on Industrial
and Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Expert Systems IEA-98, 1998.
