Handling Vague and Qualitative Criteria in
Case-Based Reasoning Applications

Ivo Vollrath

Artificial Intelligence/Knowledge Based Systems group, University of Kaiserslautern
vollrath@informatik.uni-kl.de
http: //wwwagr.informatik.uni-kl.de/



Abstract. In some case-based reasoning (CBR) applications for decision 
support there are a number of vague or qualitative criteria that have
to be taken into account by the similarity measure. Sometimes, these criteria 
are very hard to acquire or quantify and they often conflict with the
“main” quality criterion that is measured by the similarity function. Surprisingly, 
this sometimes is true even for cost criteria (mostly believed to
be quite quantitative): in certain applications, the acceptable cost limit
depends mostly on the quality that is available and thus cannot be specified 
a priori. This paper discusses the problems arising from this kind
of implicit criteria and shows approaches of how they can be integrated
into the similarity measure of a case-based reasoning system without the
need of artificially quantifying them.
References

1.	Ivo Volirath and Peter Oehler. Intelligent retrieval of electronic designs in online
catalogs. In Wolfgang Wilke and Jürgen Schumacher, editors, KI-98 Workshop on
Intelligent Systems and Electronic Commerce, number LSA-98-03E in LSA Report,
pages 57—63, Kaiserslautern, 1998. Centre for Learning Systems and Applications
(LSA).
2.	Norbert Faulhaber and Ralf Seepold. An efficient similarity metric for IP reuse in
RMS. In Kunzmann and Seepold [81, pages 23—32.
3.	Ranto Rafidinitrimo, Philippe Coeurdevey, and Gabrièle Saucier. IP key features 
and an object oriented IP catalog management system. Design & Reuse
Technical Paper, Grenoble, France, On-Line, Last seen at http://www.design-reuse.com/NEWS/paper02..98.html, February 1999.
4.	Michael M. Richter and Klaus-Dieter Althoff. Similarity and utility in non-numerical 
domains. In Mathematische Methoden der Wirtschaftswissenschaften,
pages 403—413. Physika-Verlag, 1999. Last seen at http://www.cbr-web.org/
documents/RichterSimilarity99.pdf.
5.	Ivo Vollratb. Reuse of complex electronic designs: Requirements analysis for a
CBR application. In Barry Smyth and Pádraig Cunningham, editors, Advances in
Case-Based Reasoning: 4th European Workshop, proceedings/EWCBR-98, volume
1488: Lecture notes in artificial intelligence of Lecture notes in computer science,
Berlin, 1988. Springer.
6.	Peter Oehler and Ivo Vollrath. Are you READEE for IPs? In Kunzmann and
Seepold [8].
7.	Michael M. Richter. The knowledge contained in similarity measures. Invited Talk
at the International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning (ICCBR-95), 1995. Last
seen at http://www.cbr-web.org/documents/Richtericcbr95remarks.html.
8.	Arno Kunzmann and Raif Seepold, editors. Proceedings 2. GI/ITG/GMM
Workshop: Reuse Techniques for VLSI Design, FZI-Report 3-13-9/98, Karlsruhe,
September 1998. Forschungszentrum Informatik.
