Lessons Learned from Deployed CBR Systems
and Design Decisions Made in Building
a Commercial CBR Tool

Hideo Shimazu and Yosuke Takashima

Information Technology Research Laboratories. NEC Corporation.
4-1-1 Miyazaki. Miyamae. Kawasaki, 216. Japan
{shimazu, yosuke}@joke.cl.nec.co.jp




Abstract. This paper reports our experiences in several CBR system
building projects. Based on the lessons learned in these projects. we
have developed a help desk support tool. Help Desk Builder. It consists
of a knowledge management tool and a customer information manage-merit tool. 
The knowledge management tool includes case-based retrieval
functions. This paper focuses on the design decisions and architecture of
the case-based functions in Help Desk Builder.
References

1.	Kitano, H., Shihata, A., Shimazu. H.. Kajihara J., Sato, A., Building Large-Scale
Corporate-Wide Case-Based Systems: Integration of Organizational and Machine
Executable Algorithms. In Proceedings of the National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence. 1992 (AAAI-92)
2.	Kitano, H and Shimazu, H, The Experience Sharing Architecture: A Case Study
in Corporate-Wide Case-Based Software Quality Control. In Case-Based Reasoning
Experiences, Lessons. & Future Directions, ed D.B. Leake, AAAI Press/The MIT
Press, 1996
3.	Kolodner, J., Case-Based Reasoning, Morgan Kaufmann. 1993.
4.	Schank, R., and Abelson, R.P., 1977. Scripts, Plans, Goals, and Understanding,
Erlbaum, Hillsdale. N.J.. 1977
5.	Shimazu, H., Kitano, H., and Shibata, A., Retrieving Cases from Relational
DataBase: Another Stride Towards Corporate-Wide Case-Based Systems, In Pro-
ceedings of the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1993 (IJCAI
93)
6.	Shimazu, H., Shibata. A., and Nihei, K.. Case-Based Retrieval Interface Adapted
to Customer-Initiated Dialogues in Help Desk Operations, In Proceedings of the
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1994 (AAAI-94)
7.	Shimazu and Takashima, Detecting Discontinuities in Case-Bases, In Proceedings
of the National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 1996 (AAAI-96)
