CBR in a Changing Environment

D. Y. Joh
Handong University
Pohang, Kyoungbuk 79 1-940, Korea
dyjoh@han.ac.kr


Abstract
Case-Based Reasoning (CBR) has been proposed for design tasks in which past experience is
exploited to solve the current problem. Based on a study of experts, it is believed that a case based
approach would be appropriate as the basis for computer aided decision support system for
intemetwork design. However, certain characteristics of the intemetwork design domain require
that the state of the art in CBR be extended before it could be applied to intemetwork design.
A knowledge revision mechanism is proposed to extend the use of previous cases.
Knowledge revision updates information about design components and uses that information to
augment the case base, enabling the retrieval mechanism to select both from actual experiences
and from experiences which might have occurred had current devices been available at the time.
A computer program, CIDA, implements key portions of the model.
An empirical experiment was performed to validate the model. The results, blinded, were
graded by three evaluators. A statistical analysis of the evaluations indicates that CIDAs
performance is between that of experts and intermediates, but is significantly better than that of
human novices. An ablation experiment shows the extended CBR approach has advantages over
both existing state-of-the-art CBR systems and constraint satisfaction systems.
References

Cohen, P. and Howe, A. (1988). “How Evaluation Guides Research, “AI Magazine,
9(4), 35-43.
Ericsson K. A. and Simon, H. A. (1984). Protocol Analysis: Verbal Reports as Data,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press.
Joh, D. (1996). “Knowledge Revision in Case-Based Reasoning: A Cognitive Model of
the Telecommunications Internetwork Design Process,” Ph.D. Dissertation, Joseph M.
Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh.
Kolodner, J. (1991). “Improving Human Decision Making through Case-Based Decision
Aiding,” AI Magazine, 12(2), 52-68.
Schank, R. C. (1982). Dynamic Memory, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
