Adaptation Using Constraint Satisfaction
Techniques *

Lisa Purvis1 and Pearl Pu2

1 Dept. of Computer Science
University of Connecticut
U-155, Storr., CT 06269
2 Laboratoire d’Intelligence Artificielle & Robotique
Institut de Microtechnique / DMT
Swiss Federal Institute of Technology (EPFL)
MT-Ecublens, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland


Abstract. Case adaptation, a central component of case-based reasoning, 
is often considered to be the most difficult part of a case-based
reasoning system. The difficulties arise from the fact that adaptation often 
does not converge, especially if it is not done in a systematic way.
This problem, sometimes termed the assimilation problem, is especially
pronounced in the case-based design problem solving domain where a
large set of constraints and features are processed. Furthermore, in the
design domain, multiple cases must be considered in conjunction in order
to solve the new problem, resulting in the difficulty of how to efficiently
combine the cases into a global solution for the new problem.
In order to achieve case combination, we investigate a methodology which
formalizes the process using constraint satisfaction techniques. We represent 
each case as a primitive constraint satisfaction problem (CSP) and
apply an existing repair-based CSP algorithm to combine these primitive 
CSPs into a globally consistent solution for the new problem. The
run time is satisfactory for providing a quick and explicable answer to
whether existing cases can be adapted or if new cases would have to be
created.
We have tested our methodology in the configuration design and assembly 
sequence generation domains.
References

1.	W. Bain. Judge. In R.C. Reisbeck, C.K.and Schank, editor, Inside Case-Based
Reasoning. Eribaum Publishers, 1989.
2.	C. Bessiere. Arc consistency in dynamic constraint satisfaction problems. In Proceedings 
of the 9th Nat. Conf. of AAAI, Anaheim, 1991.
3.	J.G. Carbonell. Derivational analogy: A theory of reconstructive problem solving
and expertise acquisition. In Machine Learning, volume 1, 1986.
4.	J.G. Carbonell and M.M. Veloso. Integrating derivational analogy into a general
problem solving architecture. In Proceedings: Workshop on Case Based Reasoning
(DARPA) Clearwater, Florida. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1988.
5.	Eric Domeshek and Janet Kolodner. Finding the points of large cases. Artificial
Intelligence in Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing (AI EDAM), 1993.
6.	W. Ewers. Sincere ‘s Vacuum Cleaner and Small Appliance Repair Service Manual.
Sincere Press, 1973.
7.	B. Faltings, D. Haroud, and I. Smith. Dynamic constraint satisfaction with continuous 
variables. In Proceedings of the European Conf. on AI Wien, 1992.
8.	D. Gentner. Structure mapping: A theoretical framework for analogy. Cognitive
Science, 7, 1983.
9.	K. Hammond. Chef: A model of case-based planning. In Proceedings of AAAI-86,
Cambridge, MA, 1986.
10.	D.H. Hennessy and D. Hinkle. Applying case-based reasoning to autoclave loading.
IEEE Expert, 7:21—26, 1992.
11.	T.R. Hinrichs. Problem solving in Open Worlds: A case study in Design. Northvale
Publishers, 1992.
12.	Kefeng Hua and Boi Faltings. Exploring case-based building design - cadre. Artificial 
Intelligence in Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing (AIEDAM),
1993.
13.	J. Kolodner. Case Based Reasoning. Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 1993.
14.	P. Koton. Reasoning about evidence in causal explanation. In Proceedings of
AAAI-88, Cambridge, MA, 1988.
15.	Mary Lou Maher and Dong Mei Zhang. Cadsyn: A case-based design process
model. Artificial Intelligence in Engineering Design, Analysis and Manufacturing
(AIEDAM), 1993.
16.	S. Minton, M. Johnston, A. Philips, and P. Laird. Minimizing conflicts: a heuristic 
repair method for constraint satisfaction and scheduling problems. Artificial
Intelligence, 58:161—205, 1992.
17.	S. Mittal and B. Falkenhainer. Dynamic constraint satisfaction. In Proceedings of
the 8th National Conference of AAAI, 1990.
18.	Pearl Pu. Issues in case-based design systems. Artificial Intelligence in Engineering
Design, Analysis and Manufacturing (AI EDAM), pages 79—85, 1993. As guest
editor for a special issue on case-based design systems.
19.	Pearl Pu and Lisa Purvis. Formalizing case adaptation in a case-based design system. 
In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on Artificial Intelligence
in Design (AID 94), August 1994.
20.	Pearl Pu and Markus Reschberger. Case-based assembly planning. In Proceedings
of DARPA’. Case-based Reasoning Workshop. Morgan Kaufmann, 1991.
