InfoFrax: CBR in Fused Cast Refractory Manufacture

Deepak Khemani1, Radhika B. Selvamani1, Ananda Rabi Dhar1, and S.M. Michael2

1 A.I. & D.B. Lab, Dept. of Computer Science & Engineering I.I.T.Madras, India
khemani@iitm.ac.in
{bradhika, anandat}@peacock.iitm.ernet.in
2Carborundum Universal Limited, Madras, India (CUMI)
mikesm@ho.cumi.co.in



Abstract. This paper describes a CBR application in manufacturing industry, a
domain where CBR has by and large proved its applicability and success. The
paper details a thorough understanding of the field of fused cast manufacturing
basically seen from the perspective of glass furnace, where quality of glass
produced is straightaway related to the refractory blocks used in furnace linings.
The applicability of CBR paradigm is revisited in the present context. The CBR
process needed is conceptualized and designed. The paper describes the
evolution of the system beginning with tackling hurdles of knowledge
acquisition, a number of pitfalls in the prototype phase, to final implementation
of InfoFrax, the CBR system specially devised for the project. It gives an
overall description of the architecture and usage. The paper also reports the
immediate response to the software in form of direct user feedback,
expectations from the existing system, and some future work already underway
in the project.
References

[1]	Balaraman, V. and Vattam, S., “Finding Common Ground in Case-Based Systems”, In
Proceedings of the International Conference KBCS-98, India. Sasikumar, M.: Durgesh
Rao.: Ravi Prakash, P.: and Ramani, S. eds. 1998. pp. 25-37
[2]	Balaraman, V., Chakraborti, S., and Vattam, S., “Using CBR Inexact Search for
Intelligent Retrieval of Data”, In Proceedings of the International Conference KBCS 2000
India. Sasikumar, M.: Durgesh Rao and Ravi Prakash, P. eds. 2000. pp. 119-130
[3] Efraim Turban, Expert Systems and Applied Artificial Intelligence, Macmillan, 1992.
[4]	Hennessey, D. and Hinkle, D. “Applying Case-based Reasoning to Autoclave Loading”,
IEEE Expert, Vol. 7, Num. 5. 1992. pp. 21-26
[5]	Mike Nelson, “Recent glass refractory application trends”, Glass Industry Development
International 2002, pp.55 - 57
[6]	Michael, S. M., and Khemani, D., “Knowledge Management in Manufacturing
Technology”, In Proceedings of the International Conference on Enterprise Information
System 2002,Ciudad Real, Spain, Vol. I, pp. 506-512
[7]	Michael, S. M., and Khemani, D., “An Industrial Application of CBR in Manufacturing to
Reduce Rejections”, In Proceedings of the Fifteenth International Florida Artificial
Intelligence Research Society Conference, Florida, USA, 2002, pp. 116-120
[8] Rissland, E.: Kolodner, J.: and Waltz, D. 1989 Case based Reasoning. Proceedings of the
DARPA Case-based Reasoning Workshop, 1-13, San Mateo, CA, Morgan Kauffman
[9]	Sivakumar A., & Ravi Kannan. In Justification of the Project, Internal memo, CUMI
Chennai, 1998.
[10]	Srinivasan, R. “Refractories for Glass Tank Furnaces: Exudation Behavior of AZS
Refractories”, Society of Glass Technology, Indian Section, Quarterly Newsletter, 1,
Vol.V Number 2. 1998.
