Route Planning by Analogy

Karen Zita Haigh and Manuela Veloso

School of Computer Science
Carnegie Mellon University
Pittsburgh PA 15213-3891
khaigh@cs.cmu.edu, mmv@cs.cmu.edu



Abstract. There have been several efforts to create and use real maps in
computer applications that automatically find good map routes. In general, 
online map representations do not include information that may be
relevant for the purpose of generating good realistic routes, including for
example traffic patterns, construction, or number of lanes. Furthermore,
the notion of a good route is dependent on a variety of factors, such as the
time of the day, and may also be user dependent. This motivation leads
to our work on the accumulation and reuse of previously traversed routes
as cases. In this paper, we demonstrate our route planning method which
retrieves and reuses multiple past routing cases that collectively form a
good basis for generating a new routing plan. We briefly present our similarity 
metric for retrieving a set of similar routes. The metric effectively
takes into account the geometric and continuous-valued characteristics of
a city map. We then present the replay mechanism and how the planner
produces the route plan by analogizing from the retrieved similar past
routes. We discuss in particular the strategy used to merge a set of cases
and generate the new route. We use illustrative examples and show some
empirical results from a detailed online map of the city of Pittsburgh
containing over 18,000 intersections and 25,000 street segments.

References
1.	Jaime G. Car bon ell, and the PRODIGY Research Group. PRODIGY4.0: The
manual and tutorial. Technical Report CMU-CS-92-150, School of Computer Science, 
Carnegie Mellon University, June 1992.
2.	Ashok Goel and et al. Multistrategy adaptive path planning. IEEE Expert,
6(6):57—65, December 1994.
3.	Richard Goodwin and Reid Simmons. Rational handling of multiple goals for
mobile robots. In J. Hendler, editor, Artificial Intelligence Planning Systems: Proceedings 
of the First International Conference (AIPS92), June 1992.
4.	Karen Zita Haigh and Jon athan Richard Shewchuk. Geometric similarity metrics 
for case-based reasoning. In Case-Based Reasoning: Working Notes from the
AAAI-94 Workshop, pages 182—187, Seattle, WA, August 1994. AAAI Press.
5.	Karen Zita Haigh, Jon athan Richard Shewchuk, and Manuela M. Veloso. Route
planning and learning from execution. In Working notes from the AAAI Fall
Symposium “Planning and Learning: On to Real Applications”, pages 58-64, New
Orleans, LA, November 1994. AAAI Press.
6.	Bing Liu and et al. Integrating case-based reasoning, knowledge-based approach
and Dijkstra algorithm for route finding. In Proceedings of the Tenth Conference
on Artificial Intelligence for Applications, pages 149—55, San Antonia, TX, March
1994.
7.	Richard S. Sutton. Planning by incremental dynamic programming. In Machine
Learning: Proceedings of the 8th International Workshop, pages 353—357. Morgan
Kaufmann, 1991.
8.	Charles E. Thorpe, editor. The CMU Navlab. Kiuwer Academic Publishers,
Boston, MA, 1990.
9.	Sebastian B. Thrun. Exploration and model building in mobile robot domains.
In Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Neural Networks, San
Francisco, CA, March 1993.
10.	Manuela M. Veloso. Automatic storage, retrieval, and replay of multiple cases. In
Preprints of the AAAI 1992 Spring Symposium Series, Workshop on Computa-
tional Considerations in Supporting Incremental Modification and Reuse, Stanford
University, CA, March 1992.
11.	Manuela M. Veloso. Planning and Learning by Analogical Reasoning. Springer
Verlag, December 1994.
