A New Approach for the Incremental
Development of Adaptation Functions for CBR

Abdus Salam Khan and Achim Hoffmann

Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
School of Computer Science and Engineering
The University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia
{askhan,achim}@cse.unsw.edu.au



Abstract. This paper introduces a new approach to building complex
adaptation functions for case-based reasoning systems.
We present an incremental method which allows a domain expert to refine 
the existing adaptation function during use of the system. We lend
ideas from Ripple-Down Rules, a proven method for the very effective
and efficient acquisition of classification knowledge during the use of a
knowledge-based system. In our approach the expert is only required to
provide explanations of why, for a given problem, a certain adaptation
step should be taken. Incrementally a complex adaptation function as
a systematic composition of many simple adaptation functions is developed. 
This approach is effective with respect to both, the development
of highly tailored and complex adaptation functions for CBR as well as
the provision of an intuitive and feasible approach for the expert.
The approach has been implemented in our CBR system MIKAS, for the
design of menus according to dietary requirements.
While our approach showed very good results in MIKAS, it represents
also a promising technique for many other CBR applications.
References

1.	R. Bergmann, S. Breen, E. Fayol, M. Goker, M. Manago, S. Schmitt, J. Schumacher, 
A. Stahl, S. Wess, and W. Wilke. Collecting experience on the systematic
development of CBR applications using the INRECA methodology. In Proceedings
of the European Workshop on Case-Based Reasoning, EWCBR98, 1998.
2.	Paul Compton, Glen Edwards, Byeong Kang, Leslie Lazarus, Ron Malor, Phil
Preston, and Ashwin Srinivasan. Ripple down rules: Thrning knowledge acquisition
into knowledge maintenance. Artificial Intelligence in Medicine, 4:463—475, 1992.
3.	Paul Compton, Byeong Kang, Phil Preston, and Mary Mulholland. Knowledge
acquisition without knowledge analysis. In Proceedings of the European Knowledge
Acquisition Workshop, pages 277—299. Springer-Verlag, 1993.
4.	K. Hanney and M. T. Keane. When do you need adaptation?: A review of current
practice. In AAAI-95 Fall Symposium on Adaptation in Knowledge Reuse, Boston,
U.S.A., 1995.
5.	Beyong Kang and Paul Compton. A maintenance approach to case-based reasoning. 
In J. P. Haton, K. Keane, and M. Manago, editors, Advances in Case-Based
Reasoning, pages 226—239. Springer-Verlag, 1995.
6.	A. S. Khan and A. Hoffmann. Incremental acquisition of retrieval knowledge for
case-based reasoning. In Proceedings of the Fourth Australian Knowledge Acquisition 
Workshop, pages 72—86, Sydney, Australia, December 5-6 1999. University of
New South Wales.
7.	D. B. Leake. Combining rules and cases to learn case adaptation. In Proceedings
of the Seventeenth Annual Conference of the Cognitive Science, pages 84—89, 1995.
8.	D. B. Leake. Case-Based Reasoning: Experiences, Lessons, and Future Directions.
Menlo Park: AAAI Press, 1996.
9.	W. Wilke and R. Bergmann. Techniques and knowledge used for adaptation during 
case-based problem solving. In (AIPS’98) Workshop on Integrating Planning,
Scheduling and Execution in dynamic and uncertain Environment. AAAI press,
1996.
10.	W. Wilke and R. Bergmann. Techniques and knowledge used for adaptation during
case-based problem solving. In 11th International Conference on Industrial and
Engineering Applications of Artificial Intelligence and Expert System, 1998.
11.	W. Wilke, 1. Volirath, K. Althoff, and R. Bergmann. A framework for learning 
adaptation knowledge based on knowledge light approaches. In 5th German
Workshop on Case-Based Reasoning (GWCBR‘97), 1997.
