A Scalable Approach for Question Based Indexing of
Encyclopedic Texts

Christopher Wisdo

The Institute for the Learning Sciences, Northwestern University
1890 Maple Avenue
Evanston, Illinois, USA
wisdo@ils.nwu.edu


Abstract. This paper describes a tool set developed to aid a human
content analyst index texts for use in a particular form of structured
hypermedia known as an ASK System. The tool set assists the content
analyst by employing a library of question templates to represent the
types of questions the output ASK system might contain. Question
templates provided roughly a six-fold increase in the rate with which
texts are indexed compared to manual techniques. Indexing progress is
linear throughout, indicating that the methodology can be used to
effectively index a large body of texts.

References
Ashley, K. D., Modeling Legal Argument: Reasoning with Cases and Hypotheticals. (Revision
of Ph.D. thesis.) Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 1990.
Bareiss, R., Exemplar-based Knowledge Acquisition: Unified Approach to Concept
Representation, Classification, and Learning, Academic Press. San Diego. 1989.
Bareiss, R., & Beckwith, R. The Evaluation of Trans-ASK (Unpublished Technical Report),
The Institute of the Learning Sciences. Northwestern University. 1994.
Bareiss, R. and Osgood, R. “Applying AI models to the design of exploratory hypermedia
systems.” Hypertext ‘93, 1993.
Bareiss ,R. and Slator, B., From PROTOS to ORCA: Reflections on a Unified Approach to
Knowledge Representation, Categorization, and Learning. Technical Report 20, Institute
for the Learning Sciences, Northwestern University, Evanston Illinois, 1992.
Cleary, C., & Bareiss, R., Practical Methods for Automatically Generating Typed Links. In The
Proceedings of the Seventh ACM Conference on Hypertext. Washington, DC: 1996.
Comptons on “Revolution, American.” Compton’s MultiMedia Encyclopedia: Compton’s
Learning Company, Britannica Software, Inc. San Francisco, California, 1991.
Conklin, E. “Hypertext: An introduction and survey.” IEEE Computer 2(1987): 17-41.
Ferguson, W., R. Bareiss, L. Birnbaum and R. Osgood. “ASK Systems: An approach to the
realization of story-based teachers.” The Journal of the Learning Sciences 1 (2 1992): 95—
134.
Lenat, D. B. and Guha, R.V. Building Large Knowledge-Based Systems: Representation and
Inference in the CYC Project. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley, 1990.
Martin, C. E. “Case-Based Parsing” and “Micro DMAP.” Inside Case-Based Reasoning, ed.
Christopher K. Riesbeck and Roger C. Schank. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1989.
Nanard, J., & Nanard. M., “Should anchors be typed too? An experiment with MacWeb.”
InThe Proceedings of the Fifth ACM Conference on Hypertext, (pp. 51-62). Seattle. WA:
ACM Press.1993.
Osgood, R. and Bareiss, R. “Automated index generation for constructing large-scale
conversational hypermedia systems.” Eleventh National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 1993, 309-3 14.
Osgood, R. “The conceptual indexing of conversational hypertext” Ph.D., Northwestern
University. 1994.
Riesbeck, C. K. and C. E. Martin: “Direct Memory Access Parsing.” In Experience, Memory
and Reasoning, eds. J. Kolodner and C. K. Riesbeck. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum
Associates, 1986.
Schank, R. C. “Rules and topics in conversation.” Cognitive Science 1(1977): 42 1-441.
Spiro, R. J. and Jehng, J. “Cognitive flexibility and hypertext: Theory and technology for the
nonlinear and multidimensional traversal of complex subject matter.” Cognition,
Education and Multimedia: Exploring Ideas in High Technology, ed. Don Nix and Rand
Spiro. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 1990.
