Bootstrapping Case Base Development with Annotated
Case Summaries *

Stefanie Brüninghaus and Kevin D. Ashley

University of Pittsburgh
Learning Research and Development Center, Intelligent Systems Program, and School of Law
3939 O’Hara Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15260
steffi+@pitt.edu, ashley+@pitt.edu



Abstract. Since assigning indicies to textual cases is very time-consuming and
can impede the development of CBR systems, methods to automate the task are
desirable. In this paper, we present a machine learning approach that helps to boot-strap 
the development of a larger case base from a small collection of marked-up
case summaries. It uses the marked-up sentences as training examples to induce a
classifier that labels incoming cases whether an indexing concept applies. We illustrate 
how domain knowledge and linguistic information can be integrated with
a machine learning algorithm to improve performance. The paper presents experimental 
results which indicate the usefulness of learning from sentences and adding
a thesaurus. We also consider the chances and limitations of leveraging the learned
classifiers for full-text documents.

References
Aha, D., Kibler, D., and Goldstone, R. 1991. Instance-based Learning Algorithms.
Machine Learning 6:37—66.
Aha, D., Maney, T., and Breslow, L. 1998. Supporting Conversational Case-Based
Reasoning in an Integrated Reasoning Framework. In Proceedings of the AAAI-98
Workshop on Case-Based Reasoning Integrations.
Aleven, V. 1997. Teaching Case-Based Argumentation through a Model and Examples.
Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh.
Ashley, K., and Aleven, V. 1997. Reasoning Symbolically about Partially Matched
Cases. In Proceedings of the 15th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
Ashley, K., and Brüninghaus, S. 1998. Developing Mapping and Evaluation Techniques 
for Textual CBR. In Proceedings of the AAAI-98 Workshop on Textual Case-Based Reasoning.
Baudin, C., and Waterman, S. 1998. From Text to Cases: Machine Aided Text Categorization 
for Capturing Business Reengineering Cases. In Proceedings of the AAAI-98
Workshop on Textual Case-Based Reasoning.
Branting, K. 1991. Building Explanations from Rules and Structured Cases. International 
Journal on Man-Machine Studies 34(6).
Brüninghaus, S., and Ashley, K. 1997. Using Machine Learning for Assigning Indices
to Textual Cases. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Case-Based
Reasoning.
Burke, R., Hammond, K., Kulykin, V., Lytinen, S., Tomuro, N. and Schoenberg, S.
1997. Question-Answering from Frequently-Asked Question Files: Experiences with
the FAQ-Finder System. AI Magazine 18(1).
Daniels, J., and Rissland, E. 1997. What you saw is what you want: Using cases to seed
information retrieval. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Case-Based 
Reasoning.
Lenz, M. 1998. Defining Knowledge Layers for Textual Case-Based Reasoning. In
Proceedings of the 4th European Workshop on Case-Based Reasoning.
Mitchell, T. 1997. Machine Learning. Mc Graw Hill.
Quinlan, R. 1993. C4.5: Programs for Machine Learning. Morgan Kaufman.
Racine, K., and Yang, Q. 1997. Maintaining Unstructured Case Bases. In Proceedings
of the 2nd International Conference on Case-Based Reasoning.
Rissland, E., Skalak, D., and Friedman, T. 1993. Case Retrieval Through Multiple Indexing 
and Heuristic Search. In Proceedings of the 13th InternationalJoint Conference
on Artificial Intelligence.
Statski, W. 1985. West’s Legal Thesaurus and Dictionary. West Publishing.
