Similarity Evaluation Between Observed Behaviours for
the Prediction of Processes

Sophie ROUGEGREZ

LAFORIA-IBP
University Pierre & Marie Curie
4, place Jussieu
75230 PARIS cedex 05
FRANCE
e-mail: rougegre@laforia.ibp.fr



Abstract:
This article deals with the prediction of processes. Research work on this
topic considers some well known processes. Their prediction is based on a
model which takes precisely into account the influence of the parameters
involved in the modification of their state. Such models are not conceivable
here : the point is indeed of some processes that human beings control little,
like forest fires, which is the subject of the system presented here. The
reasoning that it uses relies on cases. We consider indeed that if two processes
behaved the same way during a certain interval then their behaviours are very
likely to be similar afterwards. The matching is based on an approximate
string matching. Because of the complexity of the handled processes, points
of view have been introduced. Their consideration requires a matching
adapted to each one. They are presented here.

Bibliography
[1] : Bernard Carré, Jean-Marc Geib : The point of view notion for multiple
inheritance. Proceedings of ECOOP/OOPSLA’90
[2] : H. Cassagne : Modélisation de la propagation des feux de forêts. Rapport du
CEA Cadarache - IPSN/DRS/SESRU
[3] : P. A. F. Hall, G. R. Dowling : Approximate string matching. Computing
surveys, Vol. 12, nº 4, pp. 381 - 402, december 1980
[4] : J. Mc Carthy : Situations, actions and causal laws. (AI memo 1), Artificial
Intelligence Project. Stanford University, 1957
[5] : O. Marino, F. Rechenmann, P. Uvietta : Multiple perspectives and
classification mechanism in object-oriented representation. Proceedings of the 9th
ECAI, Stockholm, 1990
[6] : M. J. Pazzani : Indexing strategies for goal specific retrieval of cases.
Proceedings of the DARPA workshop on CBR, 1989
[7] : S. Rougegrez : A case-based reasoning system independent of a representation
of cases in terms of features. Proceedings of the AAAI Spring Symposium on Case-based 
reasoning and Information Retrieval, Stanford University, March 1993
[8] : L. Trabaud : Lesfeux de forêts : mécanismes, comportement et environnement.
France Sélection, 1992
[9] : Wagner R.A., Fischer M.J. : The string-to-string correction problem. Journal of
the ACM. Vol. 21, No. 1, 1974
