Combining Rule-Based and Case-Based Learning
for Iterative Part-of-Speech Tagging

Alneu de Andrade Lopes and Alipio Jorge

LIACC - Laboratório de Inteligência Artificial e Ciências de Computadores
Universidade do Porto - R. do Campo Alegre 823, 4150 Porto, Portugal
alneu@ncc.up.pt
amjorge@ncc.up.pt



Abstract. In this article we show how the accuracy of a rule based first
order theory may be increased by combining it with a case-based
approach in a classification task. Case-based learning is used when the
rule language bias is exhausted. This is achieved in an iterative
approach. In each iteration theories consisting of first order rules are
induced and covered examples are removed. The process stops when it
is no longer possible to find rules with satisfactory quality. The
remaining examples are then handled as cases. The case-based
approach proposed here is also, to a large extent, new. Instead of only
storing the cases as provided, it has a learning phase where, for each
case, it constructs and stores a set of explanations with support and
confidence above given thresholds. These explanations have different
levels of generality and the maximally specific one corresponds to the
case itself The same case may have different explanations representing
different perspectives of the case. Therefore, to classify a new case, it
looks for relevant stored explanations applicable to the new case. The
different possible views of the case given by the explanations
correspond to considering different sets of conditions/features to
analyze the case. In other words, they lead to different ways to compute
similarity between known cases/explanations and the new case to be
classified (as opposed to the commonly used global metric).
Experimental results have been obtained on a corpus of Portuguese
texts for the task of part-of-speech tagging with significant
improvement.
References

1 .	Aamodt, E. Plaza Case-Based Reasoning: Foundational Issues, Methodological
Variations, and System Approaches. Al Communications, Vol. 7 Nr. 1, (1994),39-59.
2.	Cussens, J.; Dzeroski, S.; Erjavec, T.: Morphosyntatic Tagging of Slovene Using
Progol. Proceedings of the 9th Int. Wdrkshop on Inductive Logic Programming
(ILP-99). Dzeroski, S. and Flach, P. (Eds). LNAI 1634, 1999.
3.	Cussens, J.: Part of Speech Tagging Using Progol. In Inductive Logic
Programming. Proceedings of the 7th Int. Workshop on Inductive Logic
Programming (ILP-9 7). LNAI 1297, 1997.
4.	Domingos, P.: Unifying Instance-Based and Rule-Based Induction. Machine
Learning 24 (1996), 141-168.
5.	Golding, A. R.; Rosenbloom, P.S.: Improving Accuracy by Providing Rule-based
and Case-based Reasoning. Artificial lntelligence 87 (1996), 2 15-254.
6.	Horváth, T.; Alexin, Z.; Gyim6thy, T.; Wrobel, S.: Application of Different
Learning Methods to Hungarian Part-of-Speech Tagging. Proceedings of the 9th
Int. Workshop on Inductive Logic Programming (ILP-99). Dzeroski, S. and
Flach, P. (Eds). LNAI 1634, 1999.
7.	Jorge, A.; Brazdil, P.: Architecture for Iterative Learning of Recursive
Definitions. Advances in Inductive Logic Programming, De Raedt, L. (Ed.), 105
Press, 1996.
8.	Jorge, A. Lopes, A.: Iterative Part-of-Speech Tagging. Learning Language in
Logic (LLL) Workshop, Cussens, J. (Ed.), 1999.
9.	Jorge, A.: lterative Induction of Logic Programs: an approach to logic program
synthesis from incomplete specifications. Ph.D. thesis. University of Porto, 1998.
10.	Lindberg, N; Eineborg, M: Improving Part-of-Speech Disambiguation Rules by
Adding Linguistic Knowledge. Proceedings of the 9th Int. Workshop on Inductive
Logic Programming (ILP-99). Dzeroski, S. and Flach, P. (Eds). LNAI 1634,1999.
11.	Liu, B:; Hsu, W:; Ma, Y.: Integrating Classification and Association Rule
Mining. In Proceedings of KDD 1998: pp. 80-86. 1998.
