A Hybrid Knowledge-Based System for
Technical Diagnosis Learning and Assistance

David J. Macchion and Dinh P. Vo

Laboratoire ARAMIIHS
Matra Marconi Space
ZI du Palays
31, Rue des Cosmonautes
31077 Toulouse Cedex, France
macchion@music.matra-espace.fr


Abstract. This paper sets out the design of a fault diagnosis system combining Model-Based, 
Case-Based and Rule-Based Reasoning techniques. Within the Model-Based
layer, domain concepts are organized in hierarchies; different aspects of the system to be
diagnosed are presented in a technical model; the Model-Based inference engine consists
of basic principles operating on the technical model. Within the Case-Based layer,
Model-Based or instructor processed resolutions are stored in a memory of past incident
cases; indexes of various influences and more or less constraining viewpoints are invoked
by the Case-Based inference engine in order to retrieve relevant cases quickly;
explanations and adaptation mles are then used to make case description match and adapt
case resolution. Within the Rule-Based layer, situation rules synthesizing incident
description and validation rules supporting diagnosis assessment are triggered by the
Rule-Based inference engine to solve well-tried, frequent or trivial problems. Integrating
these knowledge layers into a unified model enhances the scope of the resultant
knowledge base. Combining these reasoning modes into a coherent control strategy
improves the efficiency of the target Knowledge-Based System.
References

1.	A. Aamodt, «A Knowledge-Intensive, Integrated Approach to
Problem Solving and Sustained Leaming», Ph.D. Dissertation,
Trondheim, 1991.
2.	K. Althoff & S.Wess, «Case-Based Knowledge Acquisition,
Learning and Problem Solving For Diagnostic Real World Tasks»,
Proceedings of EKAW, Mai 1991.
3.	U. Arronategni & F. Mieulet, «Le langage LOIR: objets, règles et
actions pour la modèlisation», Ph.D. Dissertation, Toulouse, 1992.
4.	R. Bareiss, «Exemplar-based knowledge acquisition : A Unified
Approach to Concept Representation, Classification, and
Leaming», Academic Press, 1989.
5.	R. Davis, «Diagnostic Reasoning Based on Structure and
Behavior», Artificial Intelligence 24, pp.347-410, 1984.
6.	A. Goel, «Integrating Case-Based and Model-Based Reasoning : A
Computational Model of Design Problem Solving», AI
MAGAZINE, pp. 50-53, Summer 1992.
7	A.Golding & P.S.Rosenbloom, «Improving Rule-Based Systems
through Case-Based Reasoning», Proceedings of the AAAI
Conference, pp. 22-27, 1991.
8.	T. Gruber, «The Acquisition of Strategic Knowledge», Academic
Press Inc, 1989.
9.	A. Keuneke, «Machine Understanding of Devices : Causal
Explanation of Diagnostic Conclusions», Ph.D. Dissertation, Ohio
State University, 1989.
10.	P. Koton, «Using Experience in Leaming and Problem Solving»,
Technical Report, Massachussetts Institute of Technology, 1988.
11.	L. Portinale, «Using Case-Based Reasoning to Focus Model-Based
Diagnostic Problem Solving», pp. 335-340, EWCBR’ 93.
12.	E. Rissland & D. Skalak, «Combining Case-Based Reasoning and
Rule-Based Reasoning : A Heuristic Approach», IJCAI-89, Vol 1,
pp. 20-25, August 1989.
