Experiments On Adaptation-Guided Retrieval
In Case-Based Design

Barry Smyth1 and Mark T. Keane2

1 Dublin Laboratory, Trinity College, Dublin 2, IRELAND
(E-mail: barry.smyth@hdl.ie)
2 Department of Computer Science, Trinity College, Dublin 2, IRELAND

Abstract. Case-based reasoning (CBR) has been applied with some success to
complex planning and design tasks. In such systems, the best case is retrieved and
adapted to solve a particular target problem. Often, the best case is that which can
be most easily adapted to the target problem (as the overhead in adaptation is
generally very high). Standard CBR systems use semantic-similarity to retrieve
cases, on the assumption that the most similar case is the easiest case to adapt.
However, this assumption can be shown to be flawed. In this paper, we report a
novel retrieval method, called adaptation-guided retrieval, that is sensitive to the
ease-of-adaptation of cases. In the context of a CBR system for software-design,
called Déjà Vu, we show through a series of experiments that adaptation-guided
retrieval is more accurate than standard retrieval techniques, that it scales well to
large case-bases and that it results in more efficient overall problem-solving
performance. The implications of this method and these results are discussed.


6 References

1.	Kolodner, J. (1989). Judging Which is the “Best” Case for a Case-Based
Reasoner. Proceedings of the Case-Based Reasoning Workshop, Florida,
U.S.A.

2.	Goel, A. (1989) Integration of Case-Based Reasoning and Model-Based
Reasoning for Adaptive Design Problem Solving. Ph.D. Thesis. Ohio State
University, USA.

3.	Birnbaum, L., Collins, G., Brand, M., Freed, M., Krulwich, B., Pryor, L.
(1989) A Model-Based Approach to the Construction of Adaptive Case-Based
Planning Systems. Proceedings of the Case-Based Reasoning Workshop,
Florida, USA.

4.	Fox, S. & Leake D. (1994) Using Introspective Reasoning to Guide Index
Refinement. Proceedings of the Sixteenth international Conference of the
Cognitive Science Conference, (pp. 324 - 329)

5.	Leake, D. (1992) Constructive Similarity Assessment: Using Stored Cases
to Define New Situations. Proceedings of the Fourteenth International
Conference of the Cognitive Science Conference, (pp. 313 - 318)

6.	Smyth, B., & Keane, M. (1994). Retrieving Adaptable Cases: The Role of
Adaptation Knowledge in case Retrieval. Topics in Case-Based Reasoning,
Springer Verlag (pp. 209-220).

7.	Cain, T., Pazzani, M. J., and Silverstein, G. (1991) Using Domain
Knowledge to Influence Similarity Judgements. Proceedings of the Case-Based 
Reasoning Workshop, (pp. 191-198). Washington D.C., U.S.A.

8.	Veloso, M. (1992) Learning by Analogical Reasoning in General Problem
Solving. Ph.D. Thesis (CMU-CS-92-174). Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, USA.

9.	Smyth, B., & Cunningham, P. (1992). Déjà Vu: A Hierarchical Case-Based
Reasoning System for Software Design. Proceedings of the 10th European
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, (pp. 587 - 589). Vienna, Austria

10.	Hammond, K. J. (1989). Planning from Memory. New York: Academic
Press.

11.	Francis, A.G., & Ram, A. (1993) Computational Models of the Utility
Problem and their Application to a Utility Analysis of Case-based
Reasoning. Proceedings of the Workshop on Knowledge Compilation and
Speed-Up Learning.
