Learning Multilingual Morphology with CLOG

Suresh Manandhar,* Saso Dzeroski#, Tomaz Erjavec#

* Intelligent Systems Group, Department of Computer Science, University of York
YO10 5DD, York, U.K.
Suresh@cs.york.ac.uk

# Department for Intelligent Systems, Jozef Stefan Institute
Jamova 39, SI-1000 LiubUana, Slovenia

Saso.Dzeroski@ijs.si, Tomaz.Erjavec@ijs.si

Abstract. The paper presents the decision list learning system CLOG
and the results of using it to learn nominal inflections of English, Romanian, 
Czech, Slovene, and Estonian. The dataset used to induce rules
for the synthesis and analysis of the inflectional paradigms of nouns and
adjectives of these languages is the MULTEXT-East multilingual tagged
corpus. The ILP system FOIDL is also applied to the same dataset, and
this paper compares the induction methodology and results of the two
systems. The experiment shows that the accuracy of the two systems
is comparable when using the same training set. However, while FoIDL
is, due to efficiency reasons, severely limited in the size of the training
set, CLOG does not suffer from such limitations. With the increase of the
training set size possible with CLOG, it significantly outperforms FoIDL
and learns highly accurate morphological rules.

References
1.	J. Cussens. Part-of-speech tagging using Progol. In Proc. 7th Intl. Wshp. on Inductive 
Logic Programming, pages 93—108. Springer, Berlin, 1997.
2.	W. Daelemans, T. Weijters, and A. van der Vosch, editors. Proc. ECML-97 Workshop 
on Empirical Learning of Natural Language Processing Tasks. Prague, Czech
Republic, 1997.
3.	S. Dzeroski and T. Erjavec. Induction of Slovene nominal paradigms. In Proc. 7th
Intl. Wshp. on Inductive Logic Programming, pages 141—148. Springer, Berlin, 1997.
4.	T. Erjavec, N. Ide, V. Petkevic, and J. Véronis. MULTEXT-East: Multilingual text
tools and corpora for Central and Eastern European languages. In Proc. 1st TELRI
European Seminar, pages 87—98. Tihany, Hungary, 1995.
5.	T. Erjavec, M. Monachini (eds.). Specifications and Notation for Lexicon Encoding.
MULTEXT-East Final Report D1.1F, Ljubljana, IJS, 1997.
6.	R. J. Mooney. Inductive logic programming for natural language processing. In Proc.
6th Intl. Wshp. on Inductive Logic Programming, pages 3—22. Springer, Berlin, 1997.
7.	R. J. Mooney and M.-E. Califf. Induction of first-order decision lists: Results on
learning the past tense of English verbs. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research,
(3):1—24, 1995.
8.	S. Muggleton. Inverse entailment and Progol, New Generation Computing,(13):245—
286, 1995.
