Rule Evaluation Measures: A Unifying View

Nada Lavrac1, Peter Flach2, Blaz Zupan3,1

1 Department of Intelligent Systems
Jozef Stefan Institute, Ljubljana, Slovenia
2 Department of Computer Science
University of Bristol, United Kingdom
3 Faculty of Computer and Information Sciences
University of Ljubljana, Slovenia



Abstract. Numerous measures are used for performance evaluation in
machine learning. In predictive knowledge discovery, the most frequently
used measure is classification accuracy. With new tasks being addressed
in knowledge discovery, new measures appear. In descriptive knowledge
discovery, where induced rules are not primarily intended for classification, 
new measures used are novelty in clausal and subgroup discovery,
and support and confidence in association rule learning. Additional measures 
are needed as many descriptive knowledge discovery tasks involve
the induction of a large set of redundant rules and the problem is the
ranking and filtering of the induced rule set. In this paper we develop
a unifying view on some of the existing measures for predictive and descriptive 
induction. We provide a common terminology and notation by
means of contingency tables. We demonstrate how to trade off these
measures, by using what we call weighted relative accuracy. The paper
furthermore demonstrates that many rule evaluation measures developed
for predictive knowledge discovery can be adapted to descriptive knowledge 
discovery tasks.
References

1.	P. Clark and T. Niblett (1989). The CN2 induction algorithm. Machine Learning
3, pp. 261—284.
2.	L. Dehaspe and L. De Raedt (1997). Mining association rules with multiple relations. 
In N. Lavrac and S. Dzeroski (Eds.), Proc. ‘7th Int. Workshop on Inductive
Logic Programming (ILP’97,), pp. 125—132, LNAI 1297, Springer-Verlag.
3.	P.A. Flach and N. Lachiche (1999). A first-order approach to unsupervised learning.
Submitted.
4.	P.A. Flach and I. Savnik (1999). Database dependency discovery: a machine learning 
approach. AI Communications, to appear.
5.	W. Klösgen (1996). Explora: A multipattern and multistrategy discovery assistant. 
In U.M. Fayyad, G. Piatetsky-Shapiro, P. Smyth and R. Uthurusamy (Eds.),
Advances in Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, 249—271, AAAI Press.
6.	T. Mitchell (1997). Machine Learning, McGraw Hill.
7.	P.M. Murphy and D.W. Aha (1994). UCI Repository of machine learning databases
[http://www.ics.uci.edu/~mlearn/mlrepository.html]. Irvine, CA: University of
California, Department of Information and Computer Science.
8.	S. Wrobel (1997). An algorithm for multi-relational discovery of subgroups. In
J. Komorowski and J. Zytkow (Eds.), Proc. Pirst European Symposium on Principles 
of Data Mining and Knowledge Discovery PKDD ‘97, Springer-Verlag.
9.	G. Piatetsky-Shapiro (1991). Discovery, analysis and presentation of strong rules.
In G. Piatetsky-Shapiro and W. Frawley (Eds.), Knowledge Discovery in Databases,
229—249. AAAI Press.
