Analysis and Prediction of Piano Performances
Using Inductive Logic Programming

Erika Van Baelen and Luc De Raedt

Department of Computer Science, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven
Celestijnenlaan 200A, B-3001 Heverlee, Belgium
Email: Luc.DeRaedt@cs.kuleuven.ac.be


Abstract. Starting from the work of Matthew Dovey on analysing Rachmarinoff’s 
piano performances using inductive logic programming, we
show how to apply the clausal discovery engine Claudien to induce theodes 
for predicting MIDI files from the musical analysis of a score.
This extends Dovey’s work in several directions: MIDI-encodings are used
instead of the older Ampico, a richer musical analysis within LaRue’s
SHMRG-model is applied, a much finer qualitative analysis of features
is learned (making it nearly quantitative), and predictions are made.
The application is not only relevant as yet another inductive logic programming 
benchmark, but also as a demonstration of the need for multiple 
predicate learning, sequence prediction and number handling in
inductive logic programming. Furthermore, the results presented here
can be considered the first original application of the clausal discovery
engine Claudien.
References

1.	D. Cope. Experiments in Music Intelligence, In Proceedings of the International
Computer Music Conference, Computer Musk Association, 1987.
2.	L. De Raedt and M. Bruynooghe. A theory of clausal discovery. In Proceedings of
the 13th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1058—1083.
Morgan Kaufmann, 1993.
3.	L. De Raedt and W. Van Laer. Inductive constraint logic. In Proceedings of the 5th
Workshop on Algorithmic Learning Theory, Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence.
Springer-Verlag, 1995.
4.	L. De Raedt, N. Lavrac, and S. Dzeroski. Multiple predicate learning. In Proceedings 
of the 13th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages
1037—1042. Morgan Kaufmann, 1993.
5.	L. De Raedt and L. Dehaspe. Clausal Discovery, Technical Report, Dept. of Computer 
Science K.U.Leuven, 1995, Submitted to Machine Learning.
8.	M.J. Dovey. Analysis of Rachmaninoff’s Piano Performances using Inductive Logic
Programming, Oxford University Computing Lab, 1995. An extended abstract was
published in Proceedings of the 8th European. Conference on Machine Learning, Lecture 
Notes in Artificial Intelligence, Springer Verlag, 1995.
7.	J. LaRue, Guidelines for Style Analysis, W.W.Norton and Co., 1970.
8.	F. Lerdahl and R. Jackendorff. A generative theory of tonal music. MIT Press, 1983.
9.	S. Muggleton. Inverse entailment and progol. New Generation Computing, 13, 1995.
10.	E. Narmour. Beyond Schenkerism: the need for alternatives in music analysis.
Chicago University Press, 1983.
11.	E. Van Baelen. Analyse van piano-uitvoeringen met behulp van inductie (in Dutch).
Master’s Thesis, Dept. of Computer Science, K.U.Leuven, 1996.
12.	G. Widmer. The synergy of music theory and artificial intelligence: learning multilevel 
expressive interpretation. In Proceedings of the 11th AAAI, 1994.
