Automatically Generating Extraction Patterns from Untagged Text

Ellen Riloff
Department of Computer Science
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
riloff@cs.utah.edu

Many corpus­based natural language processing sys­tems 
rely on text corpora that have been manually
annotated with syntactic or semantic tags. In partic­ular, 
all previous dictionary construction systems for
information extraction have used an annotated train­ing 
corpus or some form of annotated input. We have
developed a system called AutoSlog­TS that creates
dictionaries of extraction patterns using only untagged
text. AutoSlog­TS is based on the AutoSlog system,
which generated extraction patterns using annotated
text and a set of heuristic rules. By adapting Au­toSlog 
and combining it with statistical techniques, we
eliminated its dependency on tagged text. In experi­ments 
with the MUC­4 terrorism domain, AutoSlog­
TS created a dictionary of extraction patterns that
performed comparably to a dictionary created by Au­toSlog, 
using only preclassified texts as input.


References
Cardie, C. 1993. A Case­Based Approach to Knowledge
Acquisition for Domain­Specific Sentence Analysis. In
Proceedings of the Eleventh National Conference on Arti­ficial 
Intelligence, 798--803. AAAI Press/The MIT Press.
Francis, W., and Kucera, H. 1982. Frequency Analysis of
English Usage. Boston, MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Hastings, P., and Lytinen, S. 1994. The Ups and Downs
of Lexical Acquisition. In Proceedings of the Twelfth
National Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 754--759.
AAAI Press/The MIT Press.
Huffman, S. 1996. Learning information extraction pat­terns 
from examples. In Wermter, S.; Riloff, E.; and
Scheler, G., eds., Connectionist, Statistical, and Symbolic
Approaches to Learning for Natural Language Processing.
Springer­Verlag, Berlin.
Kim, J., and Moldovan, D. 1993. Acquisition of Semantic
Patterns for Information Extraction from Corpora. In
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE Conference on Artificial
Intelligence for Applications, 171--176. Los Alamitos, CA:
IEEE Computer Society Press.
Lehnert, W. 1991. Symbolic/Subsymbolic Sentence Anal­ysis: 
Exploiting the Best of Two Worlds. In Barnden, J.,
and Pollack, J., eds., Advances in Connectionist and Neural 
Computation Theory, Vol. 1. Ablex Publishers, Nor­wood, NJ. 135--164.
Marcus, M.; Santorini, B.; and Marcinkiewicz, M. 1993.
Building a Large Annotated Corpus of English: The Penn
Treebank. Computational Linguistics 19(2):313--330.
MUC­4 Proceedings. 1992. Proceedings of the Fourth
Message Understanding Conference (MUC­4). San Ma­teo, CA: Morgan Kaufmann.
Riloff, E., and Shoen, J. 1995. Automatically Acquiring
Conceptual Patterns Without an Annotated Corpus. In
Proceedings of the Third Workshop on Very Large Cor­pora, 148--161.
Riloff, E. 1993. Automatically Constructing a Dictio­
nary for Information Extraction Tasks. In Proceedings
of the Eleventh National Conference on Artificial 
Intelli­gence, 811--816. AAAI Press/The MIT Press.
Riloff, E. 1996. An Empirical Study of Automated Dic­tionary 
Construction for Information Extraction in Three
Domains. Artificial Intelligence. Vol. 85. Forthcoming.
Soderland, S.; Fisher, D.; Aseltine, J.; and Lehnert, W.
1995. CRYSTAL: Inducing a conceptual dictionary. In
Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint Confer­ence 
on Artificial Intelligence, 1314--1319.

