Using Mobile Agents for Analyzing Intrusion in Computer Networks #

Jay Aslam Marco Cremonini David Kotz Daniela Rus +
Department of Computer Science, Institute for Security Technology Studies
Dartmouth College
Hanover, NH 03755

Today hackers disguise their attacks by launching
them form a set of compromised hosts distributed
across the Internet. It is very dificult to defend
against these attacks or to track down their origin.
Commercially available intrusion detection systems
can signal the occurrence of limited known types of at­
tacks. New types of attacks are launched regularly but
these tools are not effective in detecting them. Human
experts are still the key tool for identifying, tracking,
and disabling new attacks. Often this involves experts
from many organizations working together to share
their observations, hypothesis, and attack signatures.
Unfortunately, today these experts have few tools that
help them to automate this process.
In this project we recognize that human experts
will remain a critical part in the process of identi­fying, 
tracking and disabling computer attacks. We
also recognize that an important part of the discov­ery, 
analysis, and defense against new distributed at­
tacks is the cooperation that occurs between experts
across different organizations. Many installations do
not have the expertise necessary to develop full attack
analyses. Our goal is to build automated tools for
computer experts and system administrators to:
. identify the characteristics of an attack given data
from network sensors
. develop a hypothesis about the nature and origin
of the attack
. share that hypothesis with security managers
from other sites
. test that hypothesis at those other sites and co­
ordinate the results of testing
. archive the data necessary for use as evidence in
later law­enforcement actions

References
[APR99] J. Aslam, K. Pelekhov, and D. Rus, ``A
practical clustering algorithm for static and dy­namic 
information organization'', Proc. of the
1999 Symposium on Discrete Algorithms.
[KGNRCC] R. Gray, D. Kotz, S. Nog, D. Rus, S.
Chawla, and G. Cybenko, ``Agent Tcl: Targeting
the needs of mobile computers'' IEEE Internet
Computing, 4(1) 58­68, July­August 1997.
[RGK97c] D. Rus, R. Gray, and D. Kotz, ``Trans­portable 
Information Agents'', Intelligent Infor­mation 
Systems, vol 9. pp 215­238, 1997.
[NN00] S. Northcutt, and J. Novak, Network Intru­sion 
Detection: An Analyst's Handbook, 2nd Edi­tion, 
New Riders Publishing. 2000.
[NCFF01] S. Northcutt, M. Cooper, M. Fearnow, and
K. Frederick, Intrusion Signatures and Analysis,
New Riders Publishing, February 2001.
[SMK00] J. Scambray, S. McClure, and G. Kurtz ,
Hacking Exposed, 2nd Edition, McGraw Hill, Oc­tober 2000.
[VK99] G. Vigna, and R. A. Kemmerer, ``NetSTAT:
A Network­based Intrusion Detection System'', J.
of Computer Security, 7(1), pp 37­71, 1999.

