Corpus­Based Identification of Non­Anaphoric Noun Phrases

David L. Bean and Ellen Riloff
Department of Computer Science
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, Utah 84112
fbean,riloffg@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Coreference resolution involves finding antecedents
for anaphoric discourse entities, such as definite
noun phrases. But many definite noun phrases are
not anaphoric because their meaning can be un­derstood 
from general world knowledge (e.g., ``the
White House'' or ``the news media''). We have
developed a corpus­based algorithm for automat­ically 
identifying definite noun phrases that are
non­anaphoric, which has the potential to improve
the efficiency and accuracy of coreference resolu­tion 
systems. Our algorithm generates lists of non­
anaphoric noun phrases and noun phrase patterns
from a training corpus and uses them to recognize
non­anaphoric noun phrases in new texts. Using
1600 MUC­4 terrorism news articles as the training
corpus, our approach achieved 78% recall and 87%
precision at identifying such noun phrases in 50 test
documents.

References
James Allen. 1995. Natural Language Understand­ing. 
Benjamin/Cummings Press, Redwood City,
CA.
Chinatsu Aone and Scott William Bennett. 1996.
Applying Machine Learning to Anaphora Reso­lution. 
In Connectionist, Statistical, and Sym­bolic 
Approaches to Learning for Natural Lan­guage 
Understanding, pages 302--314. Springer­
Verlag, Berlin.
Andrew Kehler. 1997. Probabilistic coreference in
information extraction. In Proceedings of the Sec­ond 
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural
Language Processing (EMNLP­97).
7 Case sensitive text can have a significant positive ef­fect 
on performance because it helps to identify proper
nouns. Proper nouns can then be used to look for restric­tive 
premodification, something that our system cannot
take advantage of because the MUC­4 corpus is entirely
in uppercase.
Christopher Kennedy and Branimir Boguraev. 1996.
Anaphor for everyone: Pronomial anaphora reso­lution 
without a parser. In Proceedings of the 16th
International Conference on Computational Lin­guistics 
(COLING­96).
Shalom Lappin and Herbert J. Leass. 1994. An al­gorithm 
for pronomial anaphora resolution. Com­putational 
Linguistics, 20(4):535--561.
Joseph F. McCarthy and Wendy G. Lehnert. 1995.
Using Decision Trees for Coreference Resolution.
In Proceedings of the 14th International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI­95),
pages 1050--1055.
Ellen F. Prince. 1981. Toward a taxonomy of given­
new information. In Peter Cole, editor, Radical
Pragmatics, pages 223--255. Academic Press.
Brian Roark and Eugene Charniak. 1998. Noun­
phrase co­occurence statistics for semi­automatic
semantic lexcon construction. In Proceedings of
the 36th Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics.
R. Vieira and M. Poesio. 1997. Processing defi­nite 
descriptions in corpora. In S. Botley and
M. McEnery, editors, Corpus­based and Compu­tational 
Approaches to Discourse Anaphora. UCL
Press.