Latent Semantic Analysis Approaches to Categorization

Darrell Laham
Department of Psychology & Institute of Cognitive Science
University of Colorado, Boulder
Boulder, CO 80309­0345
dlaham@psych.colorado.edu

Many computational models of semantic memory rely on
vector representations of concepts based on explicit encoding
of arbitrary feature sets. Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
creates high dimensional (n = 300+) vectors for concepts in
semantic memory through statistical analysis of a large rep­resentative 
corpus of text rather than subjective feature sets
linked to object names (for details see Landauer & Dumais,
1997; Landauer, Foltz, & Laham, in press). Concepts can be
compared in the semantic space and their similarity indexed
by the cosine of the angle between vectors.
Computational models of concept relations using LSA
representations demonstrate that categories can be emergent
and self­organizing based exclusively on the way language is
used in the corpus without explicit hand­coding of category
membership or semantic features. LSA categorization is
context dependent and occurs through a dynamic process of
induction. Semantic ``meaning'' is not encapsulated within
an object representation, but emerges as the set of relation­
ships between selected objects in a context­based sub­space.
Neuropsychological studies (e.g. Warrington & Shallice,
1984) point to a class of patients who exhibit disnomias for
specific categories of objects (natural kinds) while retaining
the ability to name other objects (man­made artifacts). The
objects from natural kind categories tend to be significantly
more clustered in LSA space than are those from artifact
categories. If brain structure corresponds to LSA structure,
the identification of concepts belonging to strongly clustered
categories should suffer more than weakly clustered concepts
when their representations are partially damaged.
Three types of modeling experiments were conducted:
matching base concept names to superordinate categories in
forced­choice testing, correlating LSA similarity measures to
human judgments of typicality, and multivariate analyses of
similarity matrices to capture category boundaries.
For the forced­choice matching of concept names to
superordinate categories, a selection of 140 objects (rated as
most typical in their category) from 14 categories was used.
Each object name was compared to each of the 14 category
names (apple---flower, apple---mammal, etc.). The LSA
match was considered correct when the highest cosine
comparison in the set was between an object and its relevant
superordinate (apple---fruit). The results show that in all 14
categories, LSA predicts membership well above chance
(chance = 7%), however, there are differences in the degree of
clustering: the percent correct for animate natural kinds
(flowers, mammals, fruit, trees, vegetables, and birds) =
92%; for inanimate natural kinds with observed deficits in
neuropsychological patients (gemstones, musical instr­uments) = 
100%; and for man­made artifacts (furniture,
vehicles, weapons, tools, toys, and clothing) = 53%.
Correlations between LSA similarity judgments and hu­man 
typicality judgments were consistently better for the
natural kinds than for the artifacts. For natural categories,
LSA similarities (cosine between concept and either
superordinate name, most typical member, or centroid of all
members) showed high correlations with human judgments
(e.g. fruit: r = .82), while artifact similarities showed low to
near­zero correlations with human judgments.
As illustrated in Figure 1, multivariate analyses of LSA­
based similarity matrices show more cohesive structure for
natural kinds than for artifacts. Factors 4­6 in this analysis
load high on concepts in the bird category---additional
factors (7­15) load on specific artifact concepts (not shown).

References
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to
Plato's problem: The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of
the acquisition, induction, and representation of
knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211­240.
Landauer, T. K., Foltz, P. W., & Laham, D. (in press).
Introduction to Latent Semantic Analysis. Discourse
Processes.
Warrington, E. K., & Shallice, T. (1984). Category­specific
semantic impairments. Brain, 107, 829­853.

