Running head: LATENT SEMANTIC ANALYSIS AND
KNOWLEDGE ASSESSMENT

Using Latent Semantic Analysis to assess knowledge:
Some technical considerations

Bob Rehder, M. E. Schreiner, Michael B. W. Wolfe, Darrell Laham,
Thomas K Landauer, and Walter Kintsch
University of Colorado, Boulder
Address correspondence to:
Bob Rehder
Department of Psychology
Campus Box 345
University of Colorado
Boulder, Colorado 80309
303­492­5907 (office) 303­492­2967 (fax)
rehder@psych . colorado . edu

Abstract
In a previous paper (Wolfe, Schreiner, Rehder, Laham, Foltz, Kintsch &
Landauer, this issue) we have shown how Latent Semantic Analysis (LSA)
can be used to assess student knowledge ­ how essays can be graded by LSA
and how LSA can match students with appropriate instructional texts. We did
this by comparing an essay written by a student with one or more target
instructional texts in terms of the cosine between the vector representation of
the student's essay and the instructional text in question. This simple method
was effective for the purpose, but questions remain about how LSA achieves
it's results and how they might be improved. Here we address four such
questions: (a) what role use of technical vocabulary per se plays, (b) how long
should the student essays be, (c) whether the cosine is optimal measure of
semantic relatedness, and (d) how to deal with the directionality of
knowledge in the high­dimensional space.

References
Carrol, J.D. & Arabie, P. (in press). Multidimensional scaling. In M. H.
Birnbaum (Eds). Handbook of Perception and Cognition, Volume 3:
Measurement, Judgment and Decision Making. New York: Academic Press
Coombs, C.H. (1964). A theory of data. New York: Wiley.
Harman, D. (1986). An experimental study of the factors important in
document ranking. In Rabbit, F. (Ed.). Association for Computing Machine's
Ninth Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval.
New York: Association for Computing Machines.
Judd, C.M., & McClelland, G.H. (1989). Data analysis: A model­
comparison approach. San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace Javanovich.
Laham, D., & Landauer, T. K. (1996). Unpublished manuscript.
Landauer, T. K., & Dumais, S. T. (1997). A solution to Plato's problem:
The Latent Semantic Analysis theory of the acquisition, induction, and
representation of knowledge. Psychological Review, 104, 211­240
Page, E.B. (1994). Computer grading of student prose, using modern
concepts and software. Journal of Experimental Education, 62, 127­142.
Wolfe, M. B. W., Schreiner, M.E., Rehder, B., Laham, D., Foltz, P. W.,
Kintsch, W. & Landauer, T. K (this issue). Learning from text: Matching
readers and texts by Latent Semantic Analysis.
