Extending Synsets with Medical Terms

Paul Buitelaar, Bogdan Sacaleanu
DFKI GmbH
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3
D­66123 Saarbruecken, Germany
{paulb,bogdan}@dfki.de

Abstract
An important problematic issue with general
semantic lexicons like WordNet or GermaNet
is that they do not cover many terms and
concepts specific to certain domains.
Therefore, these resources need to be tuned to
a specific domain at hand. This involves
selecting those senses that are most
appropriate for the domain, as well as
extending the sense inventory with novel
terms and novel senses that are specific to the
domain. In this paper we focus on extending
GermaNet synsets with domain specific terms,
taking into account the domain relevance of
senses (i.e. synsets).


References
Basili R., Della Rocca M. and Pazienza M.­
T. Contextual Word Sense Tuning and
Disambiguation. Applied Artificial Intelligence,
vol. 11, 1997.
Brown P., Pietra, V., deSouza P. V., Lai J.,
and Mercer R. L. Class­based n­gram models of
natural language. Computational Linguistic,
18:467­­479, 1992.
Buitelaar, P. MUCHMORE: Multilingual
Concept Hierarchies for Medical Information
Organization and Retrieval. In: Proceedings of
ASIS, Chicago, 2000.
Buitelaar P. and Sacaleanu B. Ranking and
Selecting Synsets by Domain Relevance. In:
Proceedings NAACL WordNet Workshop,
2001.
Church, K. and Hanks, P. Word Association
Norms, Mutual Information, and Lexicography.
Computational Linguistics, vol. 16:1, 22­29,
1990.
Cucchiarelli A. and Velardi P. Finding a
Domain­Appropriate Sense Inventory for
Semantically Tagging a Corpus. In: Journal of
Natural Language Engineering, 1998.
Brants, T. TnT ­ A Statistical Part­of­Speech
Tagger. In: Proceedings of 6 th ANLP
Conference, Seattle, WA, 2000.
Hamp, B. and Feldweg, H. GermaNet: a
Lexical­Semantic Net for German. In:
Proceedings of the ACL/EACL97 workshop on
Automatic Information Extraction and Building
of Lexical Semantic Resources for NLP
Applications, Madrid, 1997.
Miller, G.A. WordNet: A Lexical Database
for English. Communications of the ACM 11,
1995.
Petitpierre, D. and Russell, G. MMORPH ­
The Multext Morphology Program. Multext
deliverable report for the task 2.3.1, ISSCO,
University of Geneva, 1995.
Salton, G. and Buckley, C. Term­Weighting
Approaches In Automatic Text Retrieval. In:
Information Processing & Management. 24, 5,
pp.515­523, 1988.
Turcato D., Popowich F., Toole J., Fass D.,
Nicholson D. and Tisher G. Adapting a synonym
database to specific domains. In: Proceedings of
the ACL workshop on recent advances in NLP
and IR. Hong Kong, 2000.
Witten, Ian H., Eibe Frank. Data Mining:
Practical Machine Learning Tools and
Techniques with Java Implementations. The
Morgan Kaufmann Series in Data Management
Systems, Jim Gray, 2000.

