An Efficient and Flexible Format for Linguistic and Semantic Annotation

SŸpela Vintar § , Paul Buitelaar § , Bärbel Ripplinger * ,
Bogdan Sacaleanu § , Diana Raileanu § , Detlef Prescher §
§ DFKI GmbH
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3,
66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
{ vintar, paulb, bogdan, raileanu, prescher}@dfki.de
* Eurospider Information Technology AG
Schaffhauserstrasse 18
CH­8006 Zürich, Switzerland
ripplinger@eurospider.ch

Abstract
The paper describes an XML annotation format and tool developed within the MUCHMORE project. The annotation scheme was
designed specifically for the purposes of Cross­Lingual Information Retrieval in the medical domain so as to allow both efficient and
flexible access to layers of information. We use a parallel English­German corpus of medical abstracts and annotate it with linguistic
information (tokenisation, part­of­speech tagging, lemmatisation and decomposition, phrase recognition, grammatical functions) as
well as semantic information from various sources. The annotation of medical terms/concepts, semantic types and semantic relations is
based on the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS). Additionally, we use EuroWordNet as a general­language resource in
annotating word senses and to compare domain­specific and general language use. A major aim of the project is also to complement
existing ontological resources by extracting new terms and new semantic relations. We present the annotation scheme, which is
conceptually related to stand­off annotation, and describe our tool for automatic semantic annotation.

References
Bird S. and Liberman, M., 2001. A Formal Framework for
Linguistic Annotation. Speech Communication 33 (1,2),
23­60.
Brants, T., 2000. TnT ­ A Statistical Part­of­Speech
Tagger. In: Proceedings of 6 th ANLP Conference,
Seattle, WA.
Dybkjær, L., Bernsen, N.O., Dybkjær, H., McKelvie, D.
and Mengel, A. 1998. The MATE Markup Framework.
MATE Deliverable D1.2, November 1998.
http://mate.nis.sdu.dk/information/d12/
Ide, N., Bonhomme, P., Romary, L. 2000. XCES: An
XML­based Standard for Linguistic Corpora..
Proceedings of the Second Language Resources
and Evaluation Conference (LREC), Athens, Greece,
825­30.
McKelvie D., Brew C. and Thompson H. 1997. Using
SGML as a Basis for Data­Intensive NLP. In
Proceedings of ANLP97, Washington, DC.
Petitpierre, D. and Russell, G. 1995. MMORPH ­ The
Multext Morphology Program. Multext deliverable
report for the task 2.3.1, ISSCO, University of Geneva.
Ripplinger B., Vintar S. and Buitelaar P. 2002. Cross­
Lingual Medical Information Retrieval through
Semantic Annotation. Proceedings of the EFMI
Workshop on Natural Language Processing in
Biomedical Applications, EFMI, ??.
Skut W. and Brants T. 1998. A Maximum Entropy partial
parser for unrestricted text. In Proceedings of the 6th
ACL Workshop on Very Large Corpora (WVLC),
Montreal.
Thompson H. and McKelvie D. 1997. Hyperlink
semantics for standoff markup of read­only documents.
In Proceedings of SGML Europe 97, Barcelona.
Vossen, P. 1997. EuroWordNet: a multilingual database
for information retrieval. In: Proceedings of the
DELOS workshop on Cross­language Information
Retrieval, March 5­7, 1997, Zurich.
from