Cross­Lingual Medical Information Retrieval through Semantic Annotation

SŸpela Vintar § , Bärbel Ripplinger * , Paul Buitelaar §
§ DFKI GmbH
Stuhlsatzenhausweg 3, 66123 Saarbrücken, Germany
{vintar, paulb}@dfki.de
*Eurospider Information Technology AG
Schaffhauserstrasse 18
CH 8006 Zürich, Switzerland
ripplinger@eurospider.com

Abstract
We present a framework for concept­based, cross­lingual information retrieval (CLIR) in
the medical domain, which is under development in the MUCHMORE project. Our
approach is based on using the Unified Medical Language System (UMLS) as the primary
source of semantic data, whereby documents and queries are annotated with multiple layers
of linguistic information. Linguistic processing includes POS­tagging, morphological
analysis, phrase recognition and the identification of medical concepts and semantic
relations between them.
The paper describes experiments in mono­ and bilingual document retrieval, performed on
a parallel English­German corpus of medical abstracts. Results show on the one hand that
linguistic processing, especially lemmatisation and compound analysis, is a crucial step to
achieving good baseline performance. On the other hand we show that semantic
information, specifically the combined use of concepts and relations, significantly increases
performance in cross­lingual retrieval.

References
1. Brants T. 2000. TnT ­ A Statistical Part­of­Speech Tagger. In: Proceedings of 6 th ANLP
Conference, Seattle, WA.
2. Eichmann D., Ruiz M. and Srinivasan P. 1998. Cross­Language Information Retrieval with the
UMLS Metathesaurus. In: Proceedings of the 21 st Annual International ACM SIGIR Conference
on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, Melbourne, Australia.
3. Gaussier E., Grefenstette G., Hull D.A. and Schulze B.M. 1998. Xerox TREC­6 site report: Cross
language text retrieval. In: Proceedings of The Sixth Text Retrieval Conference (TREC­6).
Gaitersburg, MD: National Institute of Standards Technology (NIST).
4. Gey F.C. and Jiang H. 1999. English­German Cross­Language Retrieval for the GIRT Collection
­ Exploiting a Multilingual Thesaurus. In: The Eighth Text REtrieval Conference (TREC­8), draft
notebook proceedings.
5. Gonzalo J., Verdejo F. and Chugur I. 1999. Using EuroWordNet in a Concept­based Approach to
Cross­Language Text Retrieval Applied Artificial Intelligence:13, 1999.
6. Oard D. 1998. A comparative study of query and document translation for cross­lingual
information retrieval In: Proceedings of AMTA, Philadelphia, PA.
7. Petitpierre D. and Russell G. 1995. MMORPH ­ The Multext Morphology Program. Multext
deliverable report for the task 2.3.1, ISSCO, University of Geneva.
8. Singhal A., C. Buckley, and M. Mitra. Pivoted Document Length Nomalization. In: Proceedings of
the 19 th ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 21­
29, 1996, Zurich.
9. Skut W. and Brants T. 1998. A Maximum Entropy partial parser for unrestricted text. In
Proceedings of the 6th ACL Workshop on Very Large Corpora (WVLC), Montreal.
10. Vossen P. 1997. EuroWordNet: a multilingual database for information retrieval. In: Proceedings
of the DELOS workshop on Cross­language Information Retrieval, March 5­7, 1997, Zurich.

