An Empirical Approach to Conceptual Case Frame Acquisition

Ellen Riloff and Mark Schmelzenbach
Department of Computer Science
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, UT 84112
riloff@cs.utah.edu, schmelze@cs.utah.edu

Abstract
Conceptual natural language processing systems
usually rely on case frame instantiation to recog­nize 
events and role objects in text. But generat­ing 
a good set of case frames for a domain is time­
consuming, tedious, and prone to errors of omission.
We have developed a corpus­based algorithm for
acquiring conceptual case frames empirically from
unannotated text. Our algorithm builds on previ­ous 
research on corpus­based methods for acquiring
extraction patterns and semantic lexicons. Given
extraction patterns and a semantic lexicon for a do­main, 
our algorithm learns semantic preferences for
each extraction pattern and merges the syntacti­cally 
compatible patterns to produce multi­slot case
frames with selectional restrictions. The case frames
generate more cohesive output and produce fewer
false hits than the original extraction patterns. Our
system requires only preclassified training texts and
a few hours of manual review to filter the dictionar­ies, 
demonstrating that conceptual case frames can
be acquired from unannotated text without special
training resources.


References
M. E. Califf and R. J. Mooney. 1997. Relational Learn­ing 
of Pattern­Match Rules for Information Extrac­tion. 
In Proceedings of the ACL Workshop on Natural
Language Learning, pages 9--15.
S. Huffman. 1996. Learning information extraction pat­terns 
from examples. In Stefan Wermter, Ellen Riloff,
and Gabriele Scheler, editors, Connectionist, Statisti­cal, 
and Symbolic Approaches to Learning for Natural
Language Processing, pages 246--260. Springer­Verlag,
Berlin.
J. Kim and D. Moldovan. 1993. Acquisition of Semantic
Patterns for Information Extraction from Corpora. In
Proceedings of the Ninth IEEE Conference on Artifi­cial 
Intelligence for Applications, pages 171--176, Los
Alamitos, CA. IEEE Computer Society Press.
W. Lehnert, C. Cardie, D. Fisher, J. McCarthy,
E. Riloff, and S. Soderland. 1992a. University of Mas­sachusetts: 
Description of the CIRCUS System as
Used for MUC­4. In Proceedings of the Fourth Mes­sage 
Understanding Conference (MUC­4), pages 282--
288, San Mateo, CA. Morgan Kaufmann.
W. Lehnert, C. Cardie, D. Fisher, J. McCarthy,
E. Riloff, and S. Soderland. 1992b. University of 
Mas­sachusetts: MUC­4 Test Results and Analysis. In 
Pro­ceedings of the Fourth Message Understanding 
Confer­ence (MUC­4), pages 151--158, San Mateo, CA. 
Mor­gan Kaufmann.
D. B. Lenat, M. Prakash, and M. Shepherd. 1986. CYC:
Using Common Sense Knowledge to Overcome 
Brit­tleness and Knowledge­Acquisition Bottlenecks. AI
Magazine, 6:65--85.
G. Miller. 1990. Wordnet: An On­line Lexical Database.
International Journal of Lexicography, 3(4).
MUC­4 Proceedings. 1992. Proceedings of the Fourth
Message Understanding Conference (MUC­4). 
Mor­gan Kaufmann, San Mateo, CA.
E. Riloff and J. Shepherd. 1997. A Corpus­Based 
Approach for Building Semantic Lexicons. In 
Proceed­ings of the Second Conference on Empirical Methods
in Natural Language Processing, pages 117--124.
E. Riloff. 1993. Automatically Constructing a 
Dictio­nary for Information Extraction Tasks. In 
Proceed­ings of the Eleventh National Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, pages 811--816. AAAI Press/The MIT
Press.
E. Riloff. 1996a. An Empirical Study of Automated
Dictionary Construction for Information Extraction in
Three Domains. Artificial Intelligence, 85:101--134.
E. Riloff. 1996b. Automatically Generating Extraction
Patterns from Untagged Text. In Proceedings of the
Thirteenth National Conference on Artificial 
Intelli­gence, pages 1044--1049. The AAAI Press/MIT Press.
S. Soderland, D. Fisher, J. Aseltine, and W. Lehnert.
1995. CRYSTAL: Inducing a conceptual dictionary.
In Proceedings of the Fourteenth International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, pages 1314--
1319.