Time in Geographic Space: Report on the Specialist Meeting of Research Initiative 10

Max J. Egenhofer and Reginald G. Golledge
National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis
Report 94-9


Abstract
This report describes the Specialist Meeting of the National Center for Geographic
Information and Analysis (NCGIA) Research Initiative on Spatio-Temporal Reasoning
in GIS. This Research Initiative addresses space and time as it relates to objects and
people in geographic space. The Specialist Meeting for the Research Initiative was held
at Lake Arrowhead, CA May 8-11, 1993 to set and prioritize a research agenda. This
meeting followed the workshop on Temporal Relations in Geographic Information
Systems held in Orono (January 1990) and a joint seminar with European researchers on
Methods of Spatio-Temporal Reasoning in GIS held in San Miniato, Italy (September
1992), which served as a forum to assess the state-of-the-art in reasoning about
geographic space and time and started a dialog among different disciplines involved in
space-time reasoning. The focus of the Lake Arrowhead-workshop was on Time in
Geographic Space.                               
The primary goal of this report is to disseminate the results of the discussions and make
them available to other researchers. Discussions at the workshop focused on cognitive
and formalization issues as they relate to spatio-temporal reasoning. Participants
identified a research agenda consisting of three complementary parts:

studies of human cognitive representation, language, and culture with
         respect to geographic space and time;        

developments of formal systems for spatio-temporal reasoning; and

efforts to bridge the gap between human and formal systems with
         appropriate means for communication and interaction.

Workshop participants found over 60 researchable questions, which they categorized
according to this framework and subsequently prioritized. High priority was given to
research that increases our knowledge of cognitive spatial representations and how such
representations can be formalized. Also, the development of temporal taxonomies
recurred throughout the discussions. Several times the need for alternatives to the
snapshot space-time model were demanded, for instance by considering processes.
An edited book with revised and extended manuscripts of selected papers is in
preparation and scheduled to appear in early 1995.    

References                                        
Al-Taha, K., 1992. Temporal Reasoning in Cadastral Systems. Ph.D. Thesis, Department
    of Surveying Engineering, University of Maine.    
Al-Taha, K., Snodgrass, R., and Soo, M., 1994. Bibliography on Spatiotemporal
    Databases. International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 8(1): 95-103.
Allen, J., 1983. Maintaining Knowledge about Temporal Intervals. Communications of
    the ACM 26(11): 832-843.                          
Barrera, R., Frank, A., and Al-Taha, K., 1991. Temporal Relations in Geographic
    Information Systems: A Workshop at the University of Maine. Santa Barbara, CA:
    National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, Report 91-4.
Egenhofer, M. and Franzosa, R., 1991. Point-Set Topological Spatial Relations .
    International Journal of Geographical Information Systems 5(2): 161-174.
Egenhofer, M., Mark, D., and Herring, J., 1994.The 9-Intersection: Formalism and Its
    Use for Natural-Language Spatial Predicates. Santa Barbara, CA: National Center
    for Geographic Information and Analysis, Technical Paper 94-1.
Frank, A., Campari, I, and Formentini, U. (eds.) 1992. Theories and Methods of Spatio-
    Temporal Reasoning in Geographic Space. New York: Springer-Verlag.
Goodchild, M. (ed.) 1989. Accuracy of Spatial Databases: Initiative 1 Specialist Meeting
    Report. Santa Barbara, CA: National Center for Geographic Information and
    Analysis, Report 89-1.                            
HŠgerstand, T., 1967. Innovation Diffusion as a Spatial Process. Chicago, IL: The
    University of Chicago Press.                      
Hazelton, N.W.J., 1991. Integrating Time, Dynamic Modelling, and Geographical
    Information Systems: Development of Four-Dimensional GIS. Ph.D. Thesis,
    Department of Surveying and Land Information, The University of Melbourne,
    Australia.                                        
Kelmelis, J., 1991. Time and Space in Geographic Information: Toward a Four-
    Dimensional Spatio-Temporal Data Model. Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Geography,
    Pennsylvania State University.                    
Langran, G., 1989. Time in Geographic Information Systems. Ph.D. Thesis, Department
    of Geography, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.
Langran, G. 1992. Time in Geographic Information Systems. London: Taylor & Francis.
Mark, D., Frank, A., Egenhofer, M., Freundschuh, S., McGranaghan, M., and White, R.
    M. 1989. Languages of Spatial Relations: Initiative 2 Specialist Meeting Report.
    Santa Barbara, CA: National Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, Report
    89-2.                                             
Mark, D. and Frank, A., (eds.) 1991. Cognitive and Linguistic Aspects of Geographic
    Space. Dordrecht, The Netherlands: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Mark, D. and Frank, A. (eds.), 1992. User Interfaces for Geographic Information
    Systems: Report on the Initiative 13 Specialist Meeting. Santa Barbara, CA: National
    Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, Report 92-3.
NCGIA, 1988. Full Proposal. Santa Barbara, CA: National Center for Geographic
    Information and Analysis, Report 88-1.            
NCGIA, 1991. Initiative 12: Integration of Remote Sensing and Geographic Information
    Systems, Report of the Specialist Meeting. Santa Barbara, CA: National Center for
    Geographic Information and Analysis, Report 91-16.
Pissinou, N., Snodgrass, R., Elmasri, R., Mumick, I., …zsu, T., Pernici, B., Segev, A.,
    Theodoulidis, B., and Dayal, U., 1994. Towards an Infrastructure for Temporal
    Databases: Report of an Invitational ARPA/NSF Workshop. SIGMOD RECORD
    23(1): 35-51.                                      
Sinton, D., 1978. The Inherent Structure of
    Information as a Constraint to Analysis: Mapped Thematic Data as a Case Study. in:
    G. Dutton (Ed.), Harvard Papers on Geographic Information Systems. 7, pp.
    SINTON/1-SINTON/17, Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Smith, T. and Frank, A., (eds.) 1989.
    Research Initiative 5: Very Large Spatial Databases: Report on the Specialist
    Meeting. Santa Barbara, CA: National Center for Geographic Information and
    Analysis, Report 89-13.                            
Tansel, A., Clifford, J., Gadia, S., Jajodia, S., Segev, A., and Snodgrass, R. (eds.) 1993.
    Temporal Databases: Theory, Design, and Implementation. Redwood City, CA:
    Benjamin/Cummings.