Multimodal Feedback for Tilt Controlled Speed Dependent Automatic Zooming                                                                    


Parisa Eslambolchilar                     John Williamson       ,Rod Murray-Smith                         
Hamilton Institute                       Department of Computing Science,                           
NUI Maynooth, Co. Kildare, Ireland                University of Glasgow, Scotland, G12                         
parisa.eslambolchilar@may.ie                           jhw,rod@dcs.gla.ac.uk                               



ABSTRACT
Speed Dependent Automatic Zooming proposed by Igarashi                                                                         
and Hinckley is a powerful tool for document navigation on                                                                     
mobile devices. We show that browsing and targeting can                                                                        
be facilitated by using a model-based sonification approach                                                                     
to generate audio feedback about document structure, in a                                                                      
tilt-controlled SDAZ interface. We implemented this system                                                                     
for a text browser on a Pocket PC instrumented with an accelerometer 
and headset, and found that audio feedback provided 
valuable information, supporting intermittent interaction, 
i.e. allowing movement-based interaction techniques to                                                                   
continue while the user is simultaneously involved with other                                                                  
tasks. This was demonstrated by a blindfolded user successfully 
locating specified elements in a text file.                                                                                


REFERENCES                                              
1. Eslambolchilar, P., and Murray-Smith, R. Tilt-based automatic zooming
and scaling in mobile devices a state-space implementation.Proceedings
of Mobile HCI 2004, Glasgow. Springer LNCS (2004), S. Brewster
and M. Dunlop, Eds.                                 
2. Hermann, T., and Ritter, H. Listen to your data: Model-based sonication 
for data analysis. intelligent computing and multi media systems.
G. E. Lasker, Ed., 189 194.                         
3. Hinckley, K., Pierce, J., Sinclair, M., and Horvitz, E. Sensing techniques 
for mobile interaction. Proceedings User Interface Software and
Technology (UIST2000). ACM (2000), 91 100.           
4. Oakley, I.,Angesle va, J., Hughes, S., and O'Modhrain, S. Tilt and feel:
Scrolling with vibrotactile display. Euro Haptics 2004.
5. Williamson, J., and Murray-Smith, R. Granular synthesis for display of
time-varying probability densities,.International Workshop on Interactive
Sonification (Human Interaction with Auditor yDisplays). Bielefeld
University, Germany (2004), A. Hunt and T. Hermann, Eds.