Sonification of Particle Systems via de Broglie's Hypothesis                                 

Bob L. Sturm
Center for Computer Research in Music and Acoustics
(CCRMA)
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305 USA
sturm@ccrma.stanford.edu


ABSTRACT                                                                                          
Quantum mechanics states a particle can behave as either a particle or a wave. Thus systems of 
particles might be likened to a complex superposition of dynamic waves. Motivated by this, the 
author develops methods for the sonification of particle systems in a logical manner. Many 
systems and physical phenomena have thus far been simulated, producing a wide range of
unique sonic events. The applications that have been explored are for algorithmic sound 
synthesis and music composition. Of critical importance is addressing the issue of latencies,
caused by large complex numerical operations at audio sampling rates.
This becomes painfully clear when particles interact with each other. Further applications of
this system include scientific sonification, with an appropriate integration of psycho 
acoustic principles; creating an application for physics and music students to extend 
and enrich their comprehension of both topics; and inspiring philosophical dialogue regarding
the similarities, intersections, and interdependence of Art and Science. Futurework aims to 
produce a real-time application for simulated and real systems, and a deeper integration
of quantum mechanics into these techniques.                        






REFERENCES
1  Bransden, B.H. and C.J. Joachain. Introduction to Quantum Mechanics. John Wiley & Sons Inc. 
New York, 1989, pp.39.
2  Hockney, R.W. and J.W. Eastwood. Computer Simulation Using Particles. Institute of Physics 
Publishing, Bristol, 1988,
   pp.117-119.
3  Gabor, D. Acoustical Quanta and the Theory of Hearing. Nature Vol. 159, No. 1044, 1947.
4  Jaffe, D. Ten Criteria for Evaluating Synthesis Techniques. Computer Music Journal
Vol. 19, No. 1, 1995.
5  Kaper, H. G., and S. Tipei. Manifold Compositions, Music Visualization, and Scientific 
Sonification in an Immersive Virtual-Reality Environment. In Proceedings of the 1998 
International Computer Music Conference. Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA: International Computer
Music Association,1998.
6  Kaper, H. G., S. Tipei, and E. Wiebel. Data Sonification and Sound Visualization. Computing
In Science and Engineering,
   Vol. 1, No. 4, 1999.
7  Kendall,G. S. Visualization by Ear: Auditory Imagery for Scientific Visualization and 
Virtual Reality. Computer Music Journal Vol. 15, No. 4, 1991.
8  Roads, C. Asynchronous Granular Synthesis, in G. De Poli et al., eds., Representation 
of Music Signals, MIT Press, Boston,1991.
9  Walker, B. andG. Kramer. Mappings and Metaphors in Auditory Displays: An Experimental
Assessment. In Proceedings of the International Community for Auditory Display (ICAD)
Conference 1996. ICAD, Palo Alto, CA, 1996.
10 Xenakis, I. Formalized Music, Thought and Mathematics in Music, revised edition,
Pendragon Press,1992.